11 Facts About 'Silent Spring' Author Rachel Carson

Although she spent most of her career as a marine biologist, Rachel Carson (1907–1964) is remembered mostly for raising the alarm over the dangers of pollution and pesticides. Her book Silent Spring detailed how chemicals like DDT could have unintended consequences; both the work and the public’s reaction to it helped usher in the modern environmental movement. Take a look at a few facts about Carson’s inspiring life.
Carson’s love of nature was no doubt due to early exposure. Her family lived on 65 acres of farmland roughly 14 miles outside of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. She also loved writing: At age 10, Carson wrote a story about a downed fighter pilot, “A Battle in the Clouds,” and submitted it to St. Nicholas magazine, a publication geared to young writers that had also published pieces from William Faulkner and F. Scott Fitzgerald. Her story was accepted and published in 1918.
Carson pursued formal education with zeal, winning a scholarship to the Pennsylvania College for Women. At the time she began attending, Carson had her sights set on earning an English degree and becoming a teacher and writer. She switched her major to biology—one of only three women at the school to join that department—and later earned her M.A. in zoology from Johns Hopkins University in 1932.
In 1935, Carson’s aptitude for communicating science earned her a job with the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries. She continued to write articles for both government and mainstream publications that presented elegant arguments on the need to preserve our natural world, including the oceans. Part of her duties involved writing seven-minute radio scripts for a segment called “Romance Under the Waters.” The following year, she was promoted to junior aquatic biologist, one of only two women of such stature at the bureau. In 1952, having become the editor-in-chief for all of the bureau’s publications, she left the agency to write full-time.
While freelancing for publications like The Baltimore Sun, Carson feared that readers would dismiss her pro-environment message if they knew the writer was a woman. Science then was a male-oriented endeavor. To reduce that chance, she published pieces under the byline “R.L. Carson.”
Carson was revered as a science writer because she turned the sterile, dull copy common in environmental research into something of interest to a wider readership. In Under the Sea-Wind, her 1941 book on marine life, Carson wrote about fish feeling fear and other animals wearing expressions. Some science writers scoffed, but those creative flourishes helped Carson deliver her work to a broader audience.
Years before Silent Spring, Carson’s 1951 book The Sea Around Us put her on the literary map. The book, about the natural history of the oceans, was serialized in The New Yorker and stayed on The New York Times bestseller list for 31 weeks, eventually winning the National Book Award. The book’s success allowed Carson to move to the Maine coast to focus on writing.
There, she met her neighbor, Dorothy Freeman, and found they shared a deep interest in the natural world. Over the next decade, Carson and Freeman developed a loving relationship, apparent in 750 letters edited and published by Freeman’s granddaughter in 1995. In a letter following a get-together in 1964, Carson wrote:
“No visit could ever be long enough, but it has been wonderful to have the sense of leisure created by four days and nights unbroken by diversions. It has been a precious oasis in time, darling, to be cherished and returned to in memory always. As you, with your great gifts, always do, you have adorned the hours with love and tenderness, and with fun and laughter, too.”
From an early age, Carson had been cognizant of the environmental effects of toxic chemicals. Her farm was near a glue factory that slaughtered horses, and the smell often compelled neighbors to abandon their porches and run indoors. Later, when Carson became a science writer, she felt the urge to warn people about studies indicating DDT could be harmful—but she knew that whoever did so would be making enemies of powerful people. Carson tried to get other writers, including E.B. White, to tackle it. When no one offered, Carson took it on herself.
In the years following her death, Carson was sometimes criticized for helping to foster hysteria about the use of pesticides like DDT. But she wasn’t the first to question their impact on the environment. In 1957, five years before the publication of Silent Spring, the U.S. Forest Service banned DDT from being sprayed around select aquatic areas. Nor was Carson advocating for a complete ban. What she wanted, she said, was to make sure people were informed about the potential hazards.
When Carson was working on Silent Spring in the early 1960s, she was suffering from a series of health problems that sapped her strength: viral pneumonia, ulcers, and breast cancer. Knowing she was being critical of the pesticides industry, she kept her health conditions largely a secret in case her adversaries wanted to say she was blaming her problems on chemicals. True to her fears, pro-chemical businesses did lob personal attacks, calling her a communist and a cat-owning spinster.
When Silent Spring was published in 1962, President John F. Kennedy felt it was a crucial wake-up call for the environmental movement. To help offset any pushback from the chemical industry, Kennedy announced that the Department of Agriculture, among other government agencies, would be examining the role pesticides play in human illnesses. He then announced a special advisory board to study the questions Carson posed in the book. When the results of the board’s work were published in 1963, they supported Carson’s belief that the general public should be better informed about the potential hazards of such chemicals. DDT was eventually banned entirely in 1972.
Carson passed away from complications following breast cancer treatment in 1964, before she could witness the changes in U.S. environmental policy that Silent Spring helped to bring about. In 1980, President Jimmy Carter honored her posthumously with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and the following year she appeared on a USPS stamp. Schools, research vessels, government buildings, wildlife refuges, and a bridge in Pittsburgh are now named for her.

https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/502504/9-facts-about-silent-spring-author-rachel-carson